(BLOCKED) Add Astro documentation (#1216)
clerk/clerk-docs: docs/quickstarts/astro.mdx

<Steps>
### Install `@clerk/astro`

Clerk's Astro SDK has prebuilt components and helpers to make user authentication easier.

To get started using Clerk with Astro, add the SDK to your project:

<CodeBlockTabs type="installer" options={["npm", "yarn", "pnpm"]}>
  ```bash filename="terminal"
  npm install @astro/clerk
  ```

  ```bash filename="terminal"
  yarn add @astro/clerk
  ```

  ```bash filename="terminal"
  pnpm add @astro/clerk
  ```
</CodeBlockTabs>

### Set environment variables

Below is an example of your `.env` file.

**Pro tip!** If you are signed into your Clerk Dashboard, your secret key should become visible by clicking on the eye icon. Otherwise, you can find your keys in the Clerk Dashboard on the [API Keys](https://dashboard.clerk.com/last-active?path=api-keys) page.

<InjectKeys>

```sh filename=".env"
PUBLIC_CLERK_PUBLISHABLE_KEY={{pub_key}}
CLERK_SECRET_KEY={{secret}}
```

</InjectKeys>

### Update `.env.d.ts`

Inside your `src/` directory, update the `.env.d.ts` file to ensure that the locals added by the middleware are properly typed.

```ts filename="src/.env.d.ts" {3}

> /// <reference path="../.astro/types.d.ts" />

Reviewer: that's a nice catch, but i actually don't know, do you think we should remove this line ?

> /// <reference path="../.astro/types.d.ts" />

Reviewer 2: I would say to double check with how you or Rob created your Astro app (maybe its conditional?), but if its isn't part of a reasonable, common creation of a new Astro app and doesn't affect Clerk w/ Astro, probably better to remove it. It could cause confusion for newer developers.

> /// <reference path="../.astro/types.d.ts" />

Author: addressed this in a new [PR](https://github.com/clerk/clerk-docs/pull/1276), IDK why I added it lol, probably when doing some local tests. But it is 💯 not in a fresh astro app

---
title: Astro Quickstart
description: Add authentication and user management to your Astro app with Clerk.
---

# Astro Quickstart

<TutorialHero
  framework="astro"
  beforeYouStart={[
    {
      title: "Set up a Clerk application",
      link: "/docs/quickstarts/setup-clerk",
      icon: "clerk",
    },
    {
      title: "Create a Astro application",
      link: "https://docs.astro.build/en/install-and-setup",
      icon: "astro",
    },
  ]}
  exampleRepo={[
    {
      title: "Astro Quickstart Repo",
      link: "https://github.com/clerk/clerk-astro-quickstart"
    }
  ]}
>

- Install `@clerk/astro`
- Set up your environment keys to test your app locally

> - Add TypeScript declarations

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Define middleware types for Clerk integration
```

- Add the `clerk()` integration to your application
- Use Clerk middleware to implement route-specific authentication
- Create a header with Clerk components for users to sign in and out

</TutorialHero>

<Steps>
### Install `@clerk/astro`

Clerk's [Astro SDK](/docs/references/astro/overview) has prebuilt components and helpers to make user authentication easier.

To get started using Clerk with Astro, add the SDK to your project:

<CodeBlockTabs type="installer" options={["npm", "yarn", "pnpm"]}>
  ```bash filename="terminal"
  npm install @clerk/astro
  ```

  ```bash filename="terminal"
  yarn add @clerk/astro
  ```

  ```bash filename="terminal"
  pnpm add @clerk/astro
  ```
</CodeBlockTabs>

### Set environment variables

<SignedIn>

> Add the following keys to your `.env.local` file. These keys can always be retrieved from the [API Keys](https://dashboard.clerk.com/last-active?path=api-keys) page of your Clerk Dashboard.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Add the following keys to your `.env.local` file. These keys can be found in the [API Keys](https://dashboard.clerk.com/last-active?path=api-keys) page of your Clerk Dashboard.
```

Reviewer: What we originally added was as text followed the pattern we have for Expo and Nextjs. So it's not astro specific. You may wanna open another PR in the future to tackle this. 
Probably i'm not the right person to decide if we want this change or not, maybe @royanger or @alexisintech can.

</SignedIn>

<SignedOut>

1. Navigate to the Clerk Dashboard.
2. In the navigation sidebar, select [API Keys](https://dashboard.clerk.com/last-active?path=api-keys).
3. In the **Quick Copy** section, copy your Clerk publishable and secret key.
4. Paste your keys into your `.env.local` file.

The final result should resemble the following:

</SignedOut>

  <InjectKeys>

  ```sh filename=".env"
  PUBLIC_CLERK_PUBLISHABLE_KEY={{pub_key}}
  CLERK_SECRET_KEY={{secret}}
  ```

  </InjectKeys>

> ### Add TypeScript declarations

Reviewer 3: I think we could be more specific with this title
```suggestion
### Define middleware types for Clerk integration
```

> Inside your `src/` directory, update the `.env.d.ts` file to ensure that the locals added by the middleware are properly typed.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Inside your `src/` directory, update the `.env.d.ts` file to define types for the local variables added by the middleware.
```

Reviewer: Seems like the Astro docs refer to "local variables" as any variable within an astro file, which is definitely not what "locals" are. 
Also types are not just for locals in the middleware, because they are accessible from any astro page/endpoint.

Reviewer 3: Great points. I edited the sentence to avoid confusion with local variables and to start with an action verb.
```suggestion
Update the `.env.d.ts` file in your `src/` directory to add type definitions for the `locals` object added by the middleware. 
```

Author: I like the suggestion of starting with an action verb, committing it!

```ts filename="src/.env.d.ts" {3}
/// <reference types="astro/client" />
/// <reference types="@clerk/astro/env" />

> ```

Reviewer 2: This is a good suggestion. I hadn't really thought of that -- if I were a guide like this I usually trust and don't worry about the order but that's me and not everyone.

> ```

Author: I like this suggestion as well. Applied

> ### Update `astro.config.mjs`

Reviewer 2: This could go either way. Given its the Clerk Astro SDK Quickstart, this is implied.

> ### Update `astro.config.mjs`

Reviewer 3: Users who use the sidebar to skim sections on a page find descriptive titles or subtitles helpful. They also helps in quickly finding specific pages through search.

To configure Clerk in your astro application, you will need to update your `astro.config.mjs`.

- Add the Clerk integration to the `integrations` list.

> - Install an [SSR adapter](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/server-side-rendering/#official-adapters). This is required for the integration to work. For this quickstart we chose the [`@astrojs/node`](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/integrations-guide/node/) adapter.

Reviewer: Hey Kev, the reason we added this was to ensure that people who do `build and preview` will have a smooth experience testing their app in a local prod setup.

> - Install an [SSR adapter](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/server-side-rendering/#official-adapters). This is required for the integration to work. For this quickstart we chose the [`@astrojs/node`](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/integrations-guide/node/) adapter.

Reviewer: I'm not entirely opposite to this suggestion, and I might revisit this one, even if we merge it as is for now.

> - Install an [SSR adapter](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/server-side-rendering/#official-adapters). This is required for the integration to work. For this quickstart we chose the [`@astrojs/node`](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/integrations-guide/node/) adapter.

Reviewer 3: I agree, but this might be confusing because it implies it only works with the Node adapter, while it works with any adapter that is based on Node, such as Netlify or Vercel. Also when running the build command, if the adapter is not set and the output is server it lets you know that you need an adapter to be able to build. Similar to running preview mode without running a build before.

> - Add the Clerk integration to the `integrations` list.
> - Install an [SSR adapter](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/server-side-rendering/#official-adapters). This is required for the integration to work. For this quickstart we chose the [`@astrojs/node`](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/integrations-guide/node/) adapter.

Reviewer 2: Let's just update the comment then to something like:
```suggestion
- Add the Clerk integration to the `integrations` list.
- Install an [SSR adapter](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/server-side-rendering/#official-adapters). This is required for the integration to work. For this quickstart we chose the [`@astrojs/node`](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/integrations-guide/node/) adapter. You can use any Node based adapter you wish.
```

  output: "server",
});
```

### Add middleware to your application

[`clerkMiddleware()`](/docs/references/astro/clerk-middleware) grants you access to user authentication state throughout your application, on any route or page. It also allows you to protect specific routes from unauthenticated users. To add `clerkMiddleware()` to your application, follow these steps:

1. Create a `middleware.ts` file inside your `src/` directory.
2. In your `middleware.ts` file, export an `onRequest` constant and assign the result of the `clerkMiddleware` function to it.

```tsx filename="src/middleware.ts"
import { clerkMiddleware } from "@clerk/astro/server";

export const onRequest = clerkMiddleware();
```

3. By default, `clerkMiddleware()` will not protect any routes. All routes are public and you must opt-in to protection for routes. See the [`clerkMiddleware()` reference](/docs/references/astro/clerk-middleware) to learn how to require authentication for specific routes.

### Add components to your app

Clerk offers components that allow you to protect your pages. These components are used to control the visibility of your pages based on the user's authentication state.

> ```astro filename="src/layouts/SiteLayout.astro"

Reviewer 3: I think for quickguides a simple example is enough to demonstrate how to use components imported from clerk.
```suggestion
```astro filename="src/pages/index.astro"
```

Reviewer 2: I'm going to disagree here. I think this Quickstart, while it doesn't have the same steps as the Next.js one, has the same ultimate approach. A default Next app has a layout and page. Astro doesn't, but its a common pattern and we're implementing it here. 

I would be fine if we trimmed it down `<style>` section but I think would like to keep the `src/pages/index.astro` implementation here.

Reviewer 3: I appreciate your opinion. The intention of this section is to demonstrate the use of pre-built components from the Clerk package in Astro. I think it could go further and include an optional step using React components. In my writing, I try to stay neutral on opinions or structure, focusing instead on showcasing features for users to use as they see fit.

---
import { SignedIn, SignedOut, UserButton, SignInButton } from "@clerk/astro/components";
---

<html lang="en">
  <head>
    <meta charset="utf-8" />
    <meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1" />
    <link rel="icon" type="image/svg+xml" href="/favicon.svg" />
    <meta name="generator" content={Astro.generator} />
  </head>
  <body>
    <header>

>       <h1>{title}</h1>

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
      <h1>Clerk + Astro</h1>
```

      <nav>
        <SignedOut>
         <SignInButton mode="modal" />
        </SignedOut>
        <SignedIn>
          <UserButton />
        </SignedIn>
      </nav>
    </header>

>     <article>
>       <slot />
>     </article>

Reviewer 3: Removing extra markup
```suggestion
```

Reviewer 2: Even if we drop the `src/pages/index.astro`, this should remain. This is reasonable expectation for a layout file and its likely to cause confusion if its removed. Devs who are newer to Astro amy miss that it was removed and fail to add it back until.

  </body>
  <style>
    h1 {
      font-size: 2rem;
    }
  </style>
</html>
```

> ```astro filename="src/pages/index.astro"
> ---
> import SiteLayout from "../layouts/SiteLayout.astro"
> ---
> <SiteLayout title="Clerk + Astro">
>   <p>Sign in to try Clerk out!</p>
> </SiteLayout>
> ```

Reviewer 3: From comment, this markup is no longer used
```suggestion
```
